# Business Case: Basecamp for DHCW Plan Management

!!! Wokk In Progress - Request For Comments

## Executive Summary

Urgent need: in two weeks, Joel begins leading many testers, who are working
across many projects, and who have urgent needs for shipping software and for
rapid upskilling.

Current state: our organization doesn't have a way for all of us to plan across
all of our projects; this causes three major burning problems: 1) work isn't
visible, leading to miscommunication and missed deadlines, 2) work is getting
lost often, leading to confusion and tribal pockets, 3) staff are frustrated by
not understanding the project scope/context/schedule, leading to morale
suffering.

Goal state: Therefore Joel wants to trial Basecamp.com, which is simple plan
management software, that is especially easy to use, and especially easy to
purchase right now because there's a special pricing plan of £300/month for
everyone at our organization plus our consultants and external stakeholders.

Context: Basecamp is intended to be a "front door" that provides a project entry
point, then in turn points users to any of our more-advanced existing systems,
such as to internal Sharepoint sites, internal Microsoft Project plans, internal
Jira/Trello boards, and the like. Basecamp is not intended to replace any of
these more-expensive more-sophisticated systems.

## What is Basecamp?

Basecamp is a project planning tool.

Key features:

- Create a project, to-do list, kanban board, calendar schedule, etc.

- Collaborate with stakeholders, with options for chats, alerts, documents.

- Onboard everyone, including consultants, advisors, auditors, end users.

Comparable features can be found in a wide range of planner products:

- Microsoft office-oriented products such as Project, Planner, DevOps.
  
- Atlassian developer-oriented products such as Trello, Jira, Confluence.
 
- Notion startup-oriented products such as for todos, wikis, blogs.
  
- Many more such as Asana, Linear, Monday, ClickUp, Workday, Roadmunk.

## Basecamp Value Proposition

### Primary Benefits

**Universal Accessibility**: Basecamp's intuitive interface enables immediate
productivity for novice users while providing powerful search and organization
for experienced users.

**Stakeholder Integration**: Single platform for all project participants,
including external consultants, advisors, and auditors, eliminating access
barriers and tool training overhead.

**Cost Efficiency**: £300 monthly for unlimited users represents exceptional
value compared to per-seat licensing models of enterprise alternatives.

**Immediate Implementation**: Pilot deployment possible immediately without
extensive configuration, training, or migration planning.

## Strategic Positioning

**Basecamp as Entry Point, Not Replacement**: Position Basecamp as the universal
front door to projects while maintaining existing sophisticated tooling for
specialized needs. Teams using Jira for development sprints or Project for
critical path analysis continue those workflows while using Basecamp for
stakeholder communication and project discovery.

**Complementary Integration**: Basecamp serves as the accessible layer where all
stakeholders can participate, with deep work continuing in specialized tools as
appropriate.

## Acknowledged Limitations

**Enterprise Features**: Basecamp intentionally omits complex enterprise project
management capabilities:

- Earned value funding

- Critical chain planning

- Advanced resource allocation

- Risk mitigation frameworks

- Strategic capability roadmapping

**Change Management**: Some teams may initially perceive Basecamp as additional
overhead rather than simplification.

- Request communications help and OCP help because Basecamp helps us for
  "Building Our Future" and we could/should connect todos to our Integrated
  Medium Term Plan (IMTP) objectives and milestones.

- Ask pilot participants for anecdotes and learnings that we can merge into a
  business case.

- Continually emphasis the importance of cross-team upskilling and cross-team
  software engineering, rather than silos.
  
## Implementation Strategy

### Phase 1: Pilot Launch

- Start with Joel's testers because the need is most urgent.

- Include projects with significant stakeholder involvement, such as the Welsh
  Authentication and Emergency Department Module.

- Run parallel to existing tools, such that teams can continue their full-speed work.


### Phase 2: Rollout

- Expand to more projects based on pilot feedback

- Maintain existing specialized tools where they add clear value

- Establish Basecamp as default for new project initiation

### Success Metrics

- Stakeholder satisfaction with project visibility

- Reduction in "where is this project?" inquiries

- Time-to-productivity for new project participants

- Overall project communication effectiveness

### Build multi-year case for enterprise tooling

- We're a big enterprise building big projects, so we know we'll need big
  software for plan management. There's a saying in tech that all roads lead to
  Jira. To some extent, this is true, because Jira is enormously powerful and
  vastly customizable. But it's very expensive, and also very hard to use
  without taking the baby-step of getting all the projects into one place. 

- We want to aim for Basecamp being 1-3 year stepping stone to prove that
  all-hands plan management helps us, so we can justify the wins with Welsh
  government, so we can justify a much larger budget to obtain Jira or similar
  enterprise plan tooling.
  
## Financial Impact

**Direct Costs**: £300/month (£3,600 annually)

**Opportunity Costs**: Reduced stakeholder confusion, faster project onboarding, improved external party 
engagement

**ROI Timeline**: Expected positive return within 3-6 months through improved project velocity and reduced coordination overhead

## Bias for action

Right now Joel is proceeding with a Basecamp trial account.

- Cost is £30/month paid with his credit card personally, no reimbursement needed. The principle is: Joel's used Basecamp and many other plan management tools, and is confident about using it for the testers; the cost is minimal and per month, so this is perfect for learning more.
 
- The trial account covers Joel's needs for experimenting with the testers and emergency department authentication, and also covers Roxana as a product owner for experimenting with Single Record needs. The principle is: we proceed in pairs, because this broadens our perspectives and improves our collaboration capabilities.
  
- The trial account covers anyone else that Joel & Roxana want to invite to participate. We expect this will quickly include relevant people from communities of practice (especially testing & AI), comms (especially for publishing content and events planning), and UI/UX (especially for user-centered design).

## Recommendation

Proceed with immediate Basecamp pilot focusing on stakeholder-heavy projects.
The combination of low cost, immediate usability, and clear positioning as a
complement to existing tools makes this a low-risk, high-value initiative that
address our organization's current fragmentation challenges while maintaining
investment in specialized tooling where it delivers value.

QUESTION: How can we approve the funding?

